docs: add couch2pg to cht-sync migration instructions (#1494)
medic/cht-docs: content/en/apps/guides/data/analytics/couch2pg-to-cht-sync-migration.md

---
title: "Migrating from Couch2pg to CHT Sync"
weight: 1
linkTitle: "Couch2pg to CHT Sync Migration"
description: >
  High-level instructions on how to migrate from Couch2pg to CHT Sync for data synchronization and analytics and what to consider during the migration process.
relatedContent: >
  core/overview/cht-sync
  core/overview/data-flows-for-analytics/
---

> This page outlines the process of migrating from [Couch2pg](https://github.com/medic/cht-couch2pg), to the new CHT Sync pipeline. One of the main changes in the new flow involves separating the syncing process from the data transformation, with DBT now handling the latter. This migration will require converting existing SQL views and tables into DBT models. One thing to note is that the schema for CHT Sync differs from Couch2pg, so the SQL views and tables will not be directly replaced by DBT models. For instructions on how to get started with DBT models refer to the [DBT Models](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}}))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page outlines guidelines for migrating from [couch2pg](https://github.com/medic/cht-couch2pg) to the data pipeline based on CHT Sync and CHT Pipeline. One of the main changes in this flow is separating the syncing process from the data transformation, with CHT Pipeline and DBT now handling the latter. This migration requires DBT models with CHT Pipeline instead of SQL views and tables. One thing to note is that the schema for CHT Sync differs from couch2pg, so DBT models will not directly replace the SQL views and tables. For instructions on how to get started with DBT models, refer to the [DBT Models](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})).
```

I removed the word `converting` to clarify that we don't expect a direct transition but a new way of writing the data models.

## Key Considerations

> - **Server resources**: To minimize downtime, it is recommended to run both Couch2pg and CHT Sync in parallel during the migration process. With this in mind, ensure that the server and database resources are sufficient to handle the load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Server resources**: To minimize downtime, running both couch2pg and CHT Sync in parallel during the migration process is recommended. With this in mind, ensure that the server and database resources are sufficient to handle the load.
```

> - **DBT Modelling**: Avoid the temptation to model new DBT models after existing SQL views and tables. Instead, take the opportunity to re-evaluate the data needs and design new models that are more efficient and effective. Think of what data needs to be shown and how it should be shown and use that to guide the design of the new models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **DBT Modelling**: Avoid the temptation to model new DBT models after existing SQL views and tables. Instead, take the opportunity to re-evaluate the data needs and design new models that are more efficient and effective. Think of what data needs to be shown and how it should be shown in data visualization tools and use that to guide the design of the new models.
```

> - **Testing**: After migrating, thoroughly test the new DBT models to ensure that they are working as expected.

Reviewer: It would be helpful to link to the dbt model testing guidelines once we have that documented.

Author: I have added a TODO comment for this

> - **Feedback**: Provide any feedback and create issues for errors or bugs encountered in the [CHT Sync](https://github.com/medic/cht-sync) and [CHT Pipeline](https://github.com/medic/cht-pipeline/) repos to make it easier for the next migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Feedback**: Provide any feedback and create issues for errors or bugs encountered in the [CHT Sync](https://github.com/medic/cht-sync) and [CHT Pipeline](https://github.com/medic/cht-pipeline/) repositories to improve the tools.
```

## Migration Steps

> 1. **Plan Migration**: Determine the scope of the migration, including the data sources, the data models, and the data transformations. Identify the SQL views and tables that need to be converted into DBT models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Plan the migration**: Determine the scope of the migration, including the data sources, the data models, and the data transformations. Identify the existing SQL views, tables, and dashboards and assess what data you want to visualize. 
```

> Identify the SQL views and tables that need to be converted into DBT models.

This slightly conflicts with the abovementioned consideration about avoiding the temptation to convert existing views to DBT models directly. I am not 100% confident about my suggestion, but it should be about "think about what data you want to visualize and start from there"

Author: Your phrasing works better so going with it.

> 1. **Set up CHT Sync**: Follow the instructions in the [Local CHT Sync Setup](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/setup" >}})) guide to set up CHT Sync locally and start DBT modelling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Set up CHT Sync**: Follow the instructions in the [Local CHT Sync Setup](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/setup" >}})) guide to set up CHT Sync locally.
1. **Build DBT models**:  Use the dedicated guidelines to build [DBT models](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})) for the data you want to visualize. 
```

I think we should create a separate step about the modeling and link the relevant page.

> 1. **Deploy CHT Sync**: Once the DBT models are tested locally and working as expected, deploy CHT Sync in production. Follow the instructions in the [Production CHT Sync Setup](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/production" >}})) guide to set up CHT Sync in production. Note that we recommend running CHT Sync in parallel with Couch2pg during the migration process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Deploy CHT Sync**: Once the DBT models are tested locally and working as expected, deploy CHT Sync in production. Follow the instructions in the [Production CHT Sync Setup](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/production" >}})) guide to set up CHT Sync in production. It is recommended that CHT Sync be run in parallel with couch2pg during the migration process.
```

Per [guidelines](https://docs.communityhealthtoolkit.org/contribute/docs/style-guide/#using-we), I removed the `we` mention.

Reviewer: > It is recommended that CHT Sync be run in parallel with couch2pg during the migration process.

I suggest adding a statement on `why` this is recommended and what are the benefits of it.

> 1. **Test New Models**: After deploying CHT Sync, test the new DBT models to ensure that they are working as expected. Make any necessary adjustments to the models to ensure that they are accurate and efficient. To do this you will need to create a replica dashboard and compare the data from the old and new pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Create replica dashboards**: In the data visualization tool of your choice, create replica dashboards of your current setup and compare the data from the old and new pipelines.
1. **Test and adjust the DBT models**: Test the DBT models to ensure they are working as expected and that the replica and initial dashboards match. Adjust the models to ensure they are accurate. 
```

I removed the `efficient` word, as this is included in the `Optimize` section below.

> 1. **Optimize**: Once the new DBT models are working as expected, optimize the models to improve performance. This may involve restructuring the models, adding indexes, or making other adjustments to improve the speed and efficiency of the models. Having a look at the [DBT Models](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})) guide will help you understand how to optimize the models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Optimize**: Once the DBT models are working as expected and the dashboards display the expected data, optimize the models to improve performance. This may involve restructuring the models, adding indexes, or making other adjustments to improve the speed and efficiency of the models. Having a look at the [DBT Models](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})) guide will help you understand how to optimize the models.
```

<!-- TODO: Link to docs for setting up CHT Watchdog once they are ready -->

> 1. **Monitor and Maintain**: Setup CHT Watchdog to monitor the running of CHT Sync and CHT Pipeline and set up alerts for any failures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Set up monitoring and alerting**: Setup CHT Watchdog to monitor the running of CHT Sync and CHT Pipeline and set up alerts for any failures.
```

> 1. **Remove Couch2pg and the duplicate database**: Once the new pipeline is running smoothly, you can remove Couch2pg and the duplicate database. Ensure that all data is being synced correctly and that the new DBT models are working as expected before switching off and removing Couch2pg.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Remove couch2pg and the duplicate database**: Once the new pipeline runs as expected, you can remove couch2pg and the duplicate database. Ensure that all data is being synced correctly, that the DBT models are working as expected, and that the dashboards display the expected data before switching them off and removing couch2pg.
```

---

> title: "Migrating from Couch2pg to CHT Sync"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Migrating from couch2pg to CHT Sync"
```

weight: 1
linkTitle: "Couch2pg to CHT Sync Migration"
description: >
  Instructions on migrating from couch2pg to CHT Sync for data synchronization and analytics.
relatedContent: >
  core/overview/cht-sync
  core/overview/data-flows-for-analytics/
---

> This page outlines guidelines for migrating from [couch2pg](https://github.com/medic/cht-couch2pg) to the data pipeline based on CHT Sync and CHT Pipeline. One of the main changes in this flow is separating the syncing process from the data transformation, with CHT Pipeline and DBT now handling the latter. This migration requires DBT models with CHT Pipeline instead of SQL views and tables. One thing to note is that the schema for CHT Sync differs from couch2pg, so DBT models will not directly replace the SQL views and tables. For instructions on how to get started with DBT models, refer to the [DBT Models](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page outlines guidelines for migrating from [couch2pg](https://github.com/medic/cht-couch2pg) to the data pipeline based on CHT Sync and CHT Pipeline. One of the main changes in this flow is separating the syncing process from the data transformation, with CHT Pipeline and DBT now handling the latter. This migration requires DBT models with CHT Pipeline instead of SQL views and tables. One thing to note is that the schema for CHT Sync differs from couch2pg, so DBT models will not directly replace the SQL views and tables. For instructions on how to get started with DBT models, refer to the [DBT models guide](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})).
```

> This page outlines guidelines for migrating from [couch2pg](https://github.com/medic/cht-couch2pg) to the data pipeline based on CHT Sync and CHT Pipeline. One of the main changes in this flow is separating the syncing process from the data transformation, with CHT Pipeline and DBT now handling the latter. This migration requires DBT models with CHT Pipeline instead of SQL views and tables. One thing to note is that the schema for CHT Sync differs from couch2pg, so DBT models will not directly replace the SQL views and tables. For instructions on how to get started with DBT models, refer to the [DBT models guide](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page outlines guidelines for migrating from [couch2pg](https://github.com/medic/cht-couch2pg) to the data pipeline based on CHT Sync and CHT Pipeline. One of the main changes in this flow is separating the syncing process from the data transformation, with CHT Pipeline and dbt now handling the latter. This migration requires dbt models with CHT Pipeline instead of SQL views and tables. One thing to note is that the schema for CHT Sync differs from couch2pg, so dbt models will not directly replace the SQL views and tables. For instructions on how to get started with dbt models, refer to the [dbt models guide](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})).
```

## Key Considerations
- **Server resources**: To minimize downtime, running both couch2pg and CHT Sync in parallel during the migration process is recommended. With this in mind, ensure that the server and database resources are sufficient to handle the load.

> - **DBT Modelling**: Avoid the temptation to model new DBT models after existing SQL views and tables. Instead, take the opportunity to re-evaluate the data needs and design new models that are more efficient and effective. Think of what data needs to be shown and how it should be shown in data visualization tools and use that to guide the design of the new models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **dbt Modelling**: Avoid the temptation to model new dbt models after existing SQL views and tables. Instead, take the opportunity to re-evaluate the data needs and design new models that are more efficient and effective. Think of what data needs to be shown and how it should be shown in data visualization tools and use that to guide the design of the new models.
```

> <!-- TODO: Link to docs for testing DBT models once they are ready -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- TODO: Link to docs for testing dbt models once they are ready -->
```

> <!-- TODO: Link to docs for testing dbt models once they are ready -->

Reviewer: This `TODO` is redundant after your update this morning, please consider removing it.
```suggestion
```

> - **Testing**: After migrating, thoroughly test the new DBT models to ensure that they are working as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Testing**: After migrating, thoroughly test the new dbt models to ensure they work as expected.
```

- **Feedback**: Provide any feedback and create issues for errors or bugs encountered in the [CHT Sync](https://github.com/medic/cht-sync) and [CHT Pipeline](https://github.com/medic/cht-pipeline/) repositories to improve the tools.

## Migration Steps
1. **Plan the migration**: Determine the scope of the migration, including the data sources, the data models, and the data transformations. Identify the existing SQL views, tables, and dashboards and assess what data you want to visualize. 

> 1. **Set up CHT Sync**: Follow the instructions in the [Local CHT Sync Setup](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/setup" >}})) guide to set up CHT Sync locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Set up CHT Sync**: Follow the instructions [to setup CHT Sync locally](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/setup" >}})).
```

> 1. **Build DBT models**:  Use the [dedicated guidelines](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})) to build DBT models for the data you want to visualize.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Build dbt models**:  Use the [dedicated guidelines](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})) to build dbt models for the data you want to visualize.
```

> 1. **Build DBT models**:  Use the dedicated guidelines to build [DBT models](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})) for the data you want to visualize.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Build DBT models**:  Use the [dedicated guidelines](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})) to build DBT models for the data you want to visualize.
```

> 1. 1. **Deploy CHT Sync**: Once the DBT models are tested locally and working as expected, deploy CHT Sync in production. Follow [the instructions to set up CHT Sync in production](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/production" >}})). It is recommended that CHT Sync be run in parallel with couch2pg during the migration process. This minimises disruption to users of the existing dashboards because they can continue to use the existing data while the new pipeline is being set up. It also makes it easier to compare the data from couch2pg when testing the new pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Deploy CHT Sync**: Once the dbt models are tested locally and working as expected, deploy CHT Sync in production. Follow [the instructions to set up CHT Sync in production](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/production" >}})). It is recommended that CHT Sync be run in parallel with couch2pg during the migration process. This minimises disruption to users of the existing dashboards because they can continue to use the existing data while the new pipeline is being set up. It also makes it easier to compare the data from couch2pg when testing the new pipeline.
```

> 1. **Deploy CHT Sync**: Once the DBT models are tested locally and working as expected, deploy CHT Sync in production. Follow the instructions in the [Production CHT Sync Setup](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/production" >}})) guide to set up CHT Sync in production. It is recommended that CHT Sync be run in parallel with couch2pg during the migration process. This minimises disruption to users of the existing dashboards because they can continue to use the existing data while the new pipeline is being set up. It also makes it easier when testing the new pipeline to compare the data from couch2pg.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Deploy CHT Sync**: Once the DBT models are tested locally and working as expected, deploy CHT Sync in production. Follow [the instructions to set up CHT Sync in production](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/production" >}})). It is recommended that CHT Sync be run in parallel with couch2pg during the migration process. This minimises disruption to users of the existing dashboards because they can continue to use the existing data while the new pipeline is being set up. It also makes it easier to compare the data from couch2pg when testing the new pipeline.
```

1. **Create replica dashboards**: In the data visualization tool of your choice, create replica dashboards of your current setup and compare the data from the old and new pipelines.

> 1. **Test and adjust the DBT models**: Test the DBT models to ensure they are working as expected and that the replica and initial dashboards match. Adjust the models to ensure they are accurate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Test and adjust the dbt models**: Test the dbt models to ensure they are working as expected and that the replica and initial dashboards match. Adjust the models to ensure they are accurate.
```

> 1. **Optimize**: Once the DBT models are working as expected and the dashboards display the expected data, optimize the models to improve performance. This may involve restructuring the models, adding indexes, or making other adjustments to improve the speed and efficiency of the models. Having a look at the [DBT models guide](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})) will help you understand how to optimize the models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Optimize**: Once the dbt models are working as expected and the dashboards display the expected data, optimize the models to improve performance. This may involve restructuring the models, adding indexes, or making other adjustments to improve the speed and efficiency of the models. Having a look at the [dbt models guide](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})) will help you understand how to optimize the models.
```

> 1. **Optimize**: Once the DBT models are working as expected and the dashboards display the expected data, optimize the models to improve performance. This may involve restructuring the models, adding indexes, or making other adjustments to improve the speed and efficiency of the models. Having a look at the [DBT Models](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})) guide will help you understand how to optimize the models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Optimize**: Once the DBT models are working as expected and the dashboards display the expected data, optimize the models to improve performance. This may involve restructuring the models, adding indexes, or making other adjustments to improve the speed and efficiency of the models. Having a look at the [DBT models guide](({{< relref "apps/guides/data/analytics/building-dbt-models" >}})) will help you understand how to optimize the models.
```

> <!-- TODO: Link to docs for setting up CHT Watchdog once they are ready -->

Reviewer: Being worked on in https://github.com/medic/cht-docs/pull/1506

1. **Set up monitoring and alerting**: Setup CHT Watchdog to monitor the running of CHT Sync and CHT Pipeline and set up alerts for any failures.

> 1. **Remove couch2pg and the duplicate database**: Once the new pipeline runs as expected, you can remove couch2pg and the duplicate database. Ensure that all data is being synced correctly, that the DBT models are working as expected, and that the dashboards display the expected data before switching them off and removing couch2pg.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Remove couch2pg and the duplicate database**: Once the new pipeline runs as expected, you can remove couch2pg and the duplicate database. Ensure that all data is being synced correctly, that the dbt models are working as expected, and that the dashboards display the expected data before switching them off and removing couch2pg.
```
